Adding Metrics section to capabilities in understanding domain (#1068)
microsoft/finops-toolkit: docs-mslearn/framework/understand/ingestion.md

<br>

## Data Ingestion Metrics

> 

Reviewer: Add a simple paragraph to explain the table. Something simple like, "Consider the following key performance indicators (KPIs) as you mature data ingestion within your FinOps practice..."

> | **Category** | **Definition** | **KPI** |

Reviewer: Can you add each one of these into the backlog for adding to Power BI?

> | **Category** | **Definition** | **KPI** |

Reviewer: Are these categories actual categories or are they names for the KPIs? They're all different, which makes them not very useful as a categorization tool.

Author: Moreso names for the KPIs, "Category" was the first to come to mind when naming the column. Maybe this can be "KPI", and the third column can be "Measurement" or something along those lines.

Reviewer: I like that better. But maybe "Formula" for the third column?

> | **Category** | **Definition** | **KPI** |

Reviewer: Should we include anything about when they should think about applying these? Some are simpler than others.

> | **Category** | **Definition** | **KPI** |

Reviewer: Can you think about the cost and carbon impact of each one of these? It may not apply everywhere. Anything that comes back to something that is metered, like data size or compute time.

|----------|-----------|-----|

> | Data Completeness | Measures the extent to which all required data fields are present in the dataset and tracks the overall data completeness trend over a specified period.| Percentage of data fields that are complete and the overall data completeness over time. |

Reviewer: How feasible is it to measure this? I'm not pushing back. It sounds like the right thing to do, but do they have a way to actually measure it? How would we calculate this for them? Should we outline any potential challenges they may have in collecting this to give them a heads up? I'd hate for someone to take this list and say, "let's go track all these" and then realize there's no way to do it.

> | Data Quality Performance | Measures the percentage of successful data quality checks and the total number of data quality checks conducted within a specified period. | Number of data quality checks conducted and the percentage of successful data quality checks . |

Reviewer: We should probably avoid "performance" since that sounds like a measurement of time. "Data quality" is probably good enough (especially as a category). If this is intended to be a KPI name, then maybe something like "pass rate". I'm sure there's something better than that.
```suggestion
| Data quality | Measures the percentage of successful data quality checks and the total number of data quality checks conducted within a specified period. | Number of data quality checks conducted and the percentage of successful data quality checks . |
```

> |Data Ingestion Frequency | Measures how often data is ingested into the system. | Number of data ingestion events per unit of time (daily, weekly, monthly, quarterly, annually). |

Reviewer: I'm not completely sure what this will result in. Might be good to have an example value. (Examples would apply to all KPIs.)

> |Data Ingestion Frequency | Measures how often data is ingested into the system. | Number of data ingestion events per unit of time (daily, weekly, monthly, quarterly, annually). |

Reviewer: This raises a question of recommended target. Having a number is only useful if you know whether that's good or bad and can make a plan to get it green. Most targets will merit an "it depends" answer, so maybe we can at least speak to how they can decide their target. In this case, we can say something about basing frequency on how often the data is being used (e.g., daily to anomaly detection or monthly for monthly business reviews).

> | Volume of Data Ingested | Measures the total volume of data ingested into the repository. | Total volume of data ingested into the repository.  |

Reviewer: What unit is "volume" measured in? Could we simplify to "Data size" or are you trying to convey something different?

| Growth Rate | Measure the rate at which the volume of data ingested is increasing over time. | Percentage increase of total data volume in repository per unit of time. |

> | Ingestion Latency | Measures the average time taken for data to be ingested into the repository and tracks the trend of this latency over a specified period. | Mean time of data ingestion latency and the latency trend over a specified period. |

Reviewer: I like this one. A few thoughts:
1. Do we need to call out that latency may differ by dataset? 
2. Do you intend to use "mean" time? Not average or percentile? All have merits, so just confirming.
3. This can likely be split into multiple KPIs.
4. Is latency trend a KPI or a visualization of a KPI over time? Not sure if visualizations need to be called out here unless we need to speak to the value of the visual. I'm open to either approach. Just thinking out loud to keep this simple. If we do keep it, it's probably a separate KPI that might be better if we can quantify a single number for it. Not sure 🤔

Author: I have added per dataset in the Formula column, adjusted to average instead of mean time, and have removed the trend component as this is a result of the KPI

> | Historical Data Availability | Measures the lookback period of data that is ingested and available for analysis. | Span of historical data ingested. |

Reviewer: This name needs some work, but I do like it. I've thought about this one as well. We need to know what data is missing so we can backfill it. Should this be bound to months with complete data over the retention/reporting period?

Author: Maybe along the lines of "Historical data span"? (Other options include, Data lookback period, Data retention period
, Ingested data horizon, Data history range) 

I think so because that'll ensure the KPI reflects the availability of fully usable historical data, providing a more accurate measure of data completeness and reliability over time. How do you suggest I modify?

> | Historical Data Availability | Measures the lookback period of data that is ingested and available for analysis. | Span of historical data ingested. |

Reviewer: This brings up a question about how much people are using historical data. We should probably talk about the cost of each month of data compared to the usage of that data. If people aren't using it, then that's wasted money. That will also help them quantify the value of storing the historical data.

> | Investigation Time to Resolution | Measures the time taken to investigate and resolve data quality or availability issues and tracks the trend of this resolution time over a specified period. | Mean time to investigate and resolve data quality or availability issues, and the trend over time. |

Reviewer: Similar comments about trends on this one. It's very interesting. This warrants its own backlog to think thru whether we have the right guidance to support it.

<br>

## KPIs and metrics

To ensure effective data ingestion in Azure, these KPIs provide a framework for evaluating key aspects such as completeness and quality.

| **KPI** | **Definition** | **Formula** |
|----------|-----------|-----|

> | Data completeness | Measures the extent to which all required data fields are present in the dataset and tracks the overall data completeness trend over a specified period.| Percentage of data fields that are complete and the overall data completeness over time. |

Author: Two aspects come to mind, the first ensuring all rows and columns of data have values(no empty cells). The second, connecting with stakeholders to determine what is required for analysis and crosschecking with what is currently ingested.  
```suggestion
| Data completeness | Measures the extent to which all required data fields are present in the dataset. Ensures no empty cells in rows and columns, and aligns with stakeholder requirements for analysis.| Percentage of data fields that are nonempty and overall data ingestion against stakeholder requirements. |
```

> | Data quality | Measures the percentage of successful data quality checks and the total number of data quality checks conducted within a specified period. | Number of data quality checks conducted and the percentage of successful data quality checks . |

Author: After the ingestion, checking the data to make sure all data fields are populated, in the expected range, consistent, follow the correct standards, or donot have unnecessary duplicate records. 
```suggestion
| Data quality | Measures the percentage of successful data quality checks by ensuring data accuracy, consistency, validity, and uniqueness. | Number of data quality checks conducted and the percentage of successful data quality checks. |
```

|Data ingestion frequency | Measures how often data is ingested into the system. | Number of data ingestion events per unit of time (daily, weekly, monthly, quarterly, annually). |
| Data size | Measures the total volume of data ingested into the repository. | Total volume of data ingested into the repository.  |

> | Growth rate | Measure the rate at which the volume of data ingested is increasing over time. | Percentage increase of total data volume in repository per unit of time. |

Reviewer: This is another good example of where we should add details about why it's important and what to do with it. This may not be obvious to everyone. It may also be useful to include the cost of the storage, compute, and networking costs associated with the ingestion process 🤔 Compute would also be applicable in reporting and not sure if we can differentiate, but something to consider.

> | Ingestion latency | Measures the average time taken for data to be ingested into the repository. | Average time of data ingestion latency per dataset. |

Reviewer: Some (or maybe all) of these seem like they are per dataset or data source. Should we call that out in any way? Should we have 2 lists? One for overall KPIs and one per dataset/source? 🤔

> | Historical data availability | Measures the lookback period of data that is ingested and available for analysis. | Span of historical data ingested. |

Author: This may need to be adjusted so that it is to ensure how much historical data they have is aligned to the business needs.
```suggestion
| Historical data availability | Measures the lookback period of data that is ingested and ensures it meets analysis requirements. | Percentage of historical data ingested that meets the required lookback period for business needs. |
```

> | Investigation time to resolution | Measures the time taken to investigate and resolve data quality or availability issues and tracks the trend of this resolution time over a specified period. | Mean time to investigate and resolve data quality or availability issues, and the trend over time. |

Reviewer: Might be worth pairing the related KPIs together. This would go with data quality above.
